Degree
  For a map f : Sn Sn with n > 0 , the induced map f : Hn(Sn) Hn(Sn) is a
homomorphism from an infinite cyclic group to itself and so must be of the form f() = d for some integer d depending only on f . This integer is called the degree of f , with the notation deg f . Here are some basic properties of degree:
(a) deg 11 = 1 , since 11 = 11 . (b) deg f = 0 if f is not surjective. For if we choose a point x0  Sn - f (Sn) then f
can be factored as a composition SnSn - {x0}  Sn and Hn(Sn - {x0}) = 0
since Sn - {x0} is contractible. Hence f = 0 . (c) If f  g then deg f = deg g since f = g . The converse statement, that f  g
if deg f = deg g , is a fundamental theorem of Hopf from around 1925 which we
prove in Corollary 4.25.
(d) deg f g = deg f deg g , since (f g) = fg . As a consequence, deg f = ±1 if f is a homotopy equivalence since f g  11 implies deg f deg g = deg 11 = 1 .
(e) deg f = -1 if f is a reflection of Sn , fixing the points in a subsphere Sn-1 and interchanging the two complementary hemispheres. For we can give Sn a  complex structure with these two hemispheres as its two n simplices 1n and n2 , and the n chain n1 - 2n represents a generator of Hn(Sn) as we saw in Example 2.23, so the reflection interchanging 1n and n2 sends this generator to its negative.
(f) The antipodal map -11 : SnSn , x  -x , has degree (-1)n+1 since it is the
composition of n + 1 reflections, each changing the sign of one coordinate in Rn+1 .
(g) If f : SnSn has no fixed points then deg f = (-1)n+1 . For if f (x)  x then the line segment from f (x) to -x , defined by t  (1 - t)f (x) - tx for 0  t  1 ,
does not pass through the origin. Hence if f has no fixed points, the formula ft(x) = [(1 - t)f (x) - tx]/|(1 - t)f (x) - tx| defines a homotopy from f to

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 135

the antipodal map. Note that the antipodal map has no fixed points, so the fact that maps without fixed points are homotopic to the antipodal map is a sort of converse statement.
Here is an interesting application of degree:

Theorem 2.28. Sn has a continuous field of nonzero tangent vectors iff n is odd.

Proof: Suppose x  v(x) is a tangent vector field on Sn , assigning to a vector
x  Sn the vector v(x) tangent to Sn at x . Regarding v(x) as a vector at the origin
instead of at x , tangency just means that x and v(x) are orthogonal in Rn+1 . If

v(x)  0 for all x , we may normalize so that |v(x)| = 1 for all x by replacing v(x)

by v(x)/|v(x)| . Assuming this has been done, the vectors (cos t)x + (sin t)v(x) lie

in the unit circle in the plane spanned by x and v(x) . Letting t go from 0 to  , we
obtain a homotopy ft(x) = (cos t)x + (sin t)v(x) from the identity map of Sn to the antipodal map -11 . This implies that deg(-11) = deg 11, hence (-1)n+1 = 1 and n

must be odd.

Conversely, if n is odd, say n = 2k - 1 , we can define v(x1, x2, ··· , x2k-1, x2k) =

(-x2, x1, ··· , -x2k, x2k-1) . Then v(x) is orthogonal to x , so v is a tangent vector

field on Sn , and |v(x)| = 1 for all x  Sn .



For the much more difficult problem of finding the maximum number of tangent vector fields on Sn that are linearly independent at each point, see [VBKT] or
[Husemoller 1966].

Another nice application of degree, giving a partial answer to a question raised in Example 1.43, is the following result:

Proposition 2.29. Z2 is the only nontrivial group that can act freely on Sn if n is
even.

Recall that an action of a group G on a space X is a homomorphism from G
to the group Homeo(X) of homeomorphisms XX , and the action is free if the

homeomorphism corresponding to each nontrivial element of G has no fixed points.
In the case of Sn , the antipodal map x  -x generates a free action of Z2 .

Proof: Since homeomorphisms have degree ±1 , an action of a group G on Sn de-
termines a degree function d : G{±1} . This is a homomorphism since deg f g =
deg f deg g . If the action is free, d sends each nontrivial element of G to (-1)n+1 by

property (g) above. Thus when n is even, d has trivial kernel, so G  Z2 .



Next we describe a technique for computing degrees which can be applied to most
maps that arise in practice. Suppose f : SnSn , n > 0 , has the property that for
some point y  Sn , the preimage f -1(y) consists of only finitely many points, say

136 Chapter 2

Homology

x1, ··· , xm . Let U1, ··· , Um be disjoint neighborhoods of these points, mapped by f into a neighborhood V of y . Then f (Ui - xi)  V - y for each i , and we have a diagram

where all the maps are the obvious ones, and in particular ki and pi are induced by inclusions, so the triangles and squares commute. The two isomorphisms in the
upper half of the diagram come from excision, while the lower two isomorphisms come
from exact sequences of pairs. Via these four isomorphisms, the top two groups in the diagram can be identified with Hn(Sn)  Z , and the top homomorphism f becomes multiplication by an integer called the local degree of f at xi , written deg f || xi .
For example, if f is a homeomorphism, then y can be any point and there is
only one corresponding xi , so all the maps in the diagram are isomorphisms and deg f || xi = deg f = ±1 . More generally, if f maps each Ui homeomorphically onto V , then deg f || xi = ±1 for each i . This situation occurs quite often in applications, and it is usually not hard to determine the correct signs.
Here is the formula that reduces degree calculations to computing local degrees:

Proposition 2.30. deg f = i deg f || xi .

Proof: By excision, the central term Hn Sn, Sn - f -1(y) in the preceding diagram
is the direct sum of the groups Hn(Ui, Ui - xi)  Z , with ki the inclusion of the ith summand. The map pi is projection onto the ith summand since the upper triangle commutes and pikj = 0 for j  i , as pikj factors through Hn(Uj, Uj) = 0 . Identi-
fying the outer groups in the diagram with Z as before, commutativity of the lower

triangle says that pij(1) = 1 , hence j(1) = (1, ··· , 1) = i ki(1) . Commutativity of

the upper square says that the middle f takes ki(1) to deg f || xi , hence the sum

i ki(1) = j(1) is taken to i deg f || xi . Commutativity of the lower square then

gives the formula deg f = i deg f || xi .



Example 2.31. We can use this result to construct a map SnSn of any given degree, for each n  1 . Let q : Sn k Sn be the quotient map obtained by collapsing the complement of k disjoint open balls Bi in Sn to a point, and let p :  k Sn Sn identify
all the summands to a single sphere. Consider the composition f = pq . For almost all
y  Sn we have f -1(y) consisting of one point xi in each Bi . The local degree of f
at xi is ±1 since f is a homeomorphism near xi . By precomposing p with reflections of the summands of k Sn if necessary, we can make each local degree either +1 or
-1 , whichever we wish. Thus we can produce a map SnSn of degree ±k .

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 137

Example 2.32. In the case of S1 , the map f (z) = zk , where we view S1 as the unit
circle in C , has degree k . This is evident in the case k = 0 since f is then constant.
The case k < 0 reduces to the case k > 0 by composing with z  z-1 , which is a
reflection, of degree -1 . To compute the degree when k > 0 , observe first that for any y  S1 , f -1(y) consists of k points x1, ··· , xk near each of which f is a local homeomorphism, stretching a circular arc by a factor of k . This local stretching can
be eliminated by a deformation of f near xi that does not change local degree, so the local degree at xi is the same as for a rotation of S1 . A rotation is a homeomorphism so its local degree at any point equals its global degree, which is +1 since a rotation
is homotopic to the identity. Hence deg f || xi = 1 and deg f = k .
Another way of obtaining a map SnSn of degree k is to take a repeated suspension of the map z  zk in Example 2.32, since suspension preserves degree:

Proposition 2.33. deg Sf = deg f , where  Sf : Sn+1 Sn+1 is the suspension of the map f : SnSn .

Proof: Let CSn denote the cone (Sn × I)/(Sn × 1) with base Sn = Sn × 0  CSn ,
 so CSn/Sn is the suspension of Sn . The map f induces Cf : (CSn, Sn) (CSn, Sn)
with quotient Sf . The naturality of the boundary maps in the long exact sequence of the pair (CSn, Sn) then

gives commutativity of the diagram at the right. Hence

if f is multiplication by d , so is Sf .



Note that for f : SnSn , the suspension Sf maps only one point to each of the
two `poles' of Sn+1 . This implies that the local degree of Sf at each pole must equal
the global degree of Sf . Thus the local degree of a map SnSn can be any integer
if n  2 , just as the degree itself can be any integer when n  1 .

Cellular Homology
Cellular homology is a very efficient tool for computing the homology groups of CW complexes, based on degree calculations. Before giving the definition of cellular homology, we first establish a few preliminary facts:
Lemma 2.34. If X is a CW complex, then :
(a) Hk(Xn, Xn-1) is zero for k  n and is free abelian for k = n , with a basis in one-to-one correspondence with the n cells of X .
(b) Hk(Xn) = 0 for k > n . In particular, if X is finite-dimensional then Hk(X) = 0 for k > dim X .
(c) The map  Hk(Xn) Hk(X) induced by the inclusion Xn  X is an isomorphism
for k < n and surjective for k = n .
Proof: Statement (a) follows immediately from the observation that (Xn, Xn-1) is a
good pair and Xn/Xn-1 is a wedge sum of n spheres, one for each n cell of X . Here

138 Chapter 2

Homology

we are using Proposition 2.22 and Corollary 2.25. Next consider the following part of the long exact sequence of the pair (Xn, Xn-1) :
   Hk+1(Xn, Xn-1) Hk(Xn-1) Hk(Xn) Hk(Xn, Xn-1)
If k  n the last term is zero by part (a) so the middle map is surjective, while if k  n - 1 then the first term is zero so the middle map is injective. Now look at the
inclusion-induced homomorphisms
      Hk(X0) Hk(X1) ··· Hk(Xk-1) Hk(Xk) Hk(Xk+1) ···
By what we have just shown these are all isomorphisms except that the map to Hk(Xk) may not be surjective and the map from Hk(Xk) may not be injective. The first part of the sequence then gives statement (b) since Hk(X0) = 0 when k > 0 . Also, the last part of the sequence gives (c) when X is finite-dimensional.
The proof of (c) when X is infinite-dimensional requires more work, and this can
be done in two different ways. The more direct approach is to descend to the chain level and use the fact that a singular chain in X has compact image, hence meets only finitely many cells of X by Proposition A.1 in the Appendix. Thus each chain lies in a finite skeleton Xm . So a k cycle in X is a cycle in some Xm , and then by the finite-dimensional case of (c), the cycle is homologous to a cycle in Xn if n  k , so
 Hk(Xn) Hk(X) is surjective. Similarly for injectivity, if a k cycle in Xn bounds a
chain in X , this chain lies in some Xm with m  n , so by the finite-dimensional case the cycle bounds a chain in Xn if n > k .
The other approach is more general. From the long exact sequence of the pair (X, Xn) it suffices to show Hk(X, Xn) = 0 for k  n . Since Hk(X, Xn)  Hk(X/Xn) , this reduces the problem to showing:
() Hk(X) = 0 for k  n if the n skeleton of X is a point.
When X is finite-dimensional, () is immediate from the finite-dimensional case
of (c) which we have already shown. It will suffice therefore to reduce the infinite-
dimensional case to the finite-dimensional case. This reduction will be achieved by stretching X out to a complex that is at least locally finite-dimensional, using a special
case of the `mapping telescope' construction described in greater generality in §3.F. Consider X × [0, ) with its product cell structure,
where we give [0, ) the cell structure with the integer points as 0 cells. Let T = i Xi × [i, ) , a subcomplex of X × [0, ) . The figure shows a schematic picture of T with [0, ) in the horizontal direction and the subcomplexes Xi × [i, i + 1] as rectangles whose size increases with i since Xi  Xi+1 . The line labeled R can be ignored for now. We claim that T  X , hence Hk(X)  Hk(T ) for all k . Since X is a deformation retract of X × [0, ) , it suffices to show that X × [0, ) also deformation retracts onto T . Let Yi = T  X × [i, ) . Then Yi deformation retracts onto Yi+1 since X × [i, i+1] deformation retracts onto Xi × [i, i + 1]  X × {i + 1} by Proposition 0.16. If we perform the

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 139

deformation retraction of Yi onto Yi+1 during the t interval [1 - 1/2i, 1 - 1/2i+1] , then this gives a deformation retraction ft of X × [0, ) onto T , with points in Xi × [0, ) stationary under ft for t  1 - 1/2i+1 . Continuity follows from the fact
that CW complexes have the weak topology with respect to their skeleta, so a map is

continuous if its restriction to each skeleton is continuous. Recalling that X0 is a point, let R  T be the ray X0× [0, ) and let Z  T be the
union of this ray with all the subcomplexes Xi × {i} . Then Z/R is homeomorphic to i Xi , a wedge sum of finite-dimensional complexes with n skeleton a point, so the
finite-dimensional case of () together with Corollary 2.25 describing the homology

of wedge sums implies that Hk(Z/R) = 0 for k  n . The same is therefore true for Z , from the long exact sequence of the pair (Z, R) , since R is contractible. Similarly, T /Z

is a wedge sum of finite-dimensional complexes with (n + 1) skeleton a point, since if we first collapse each subcomplex Xi × {i} of T to a point, we obtain the infinite sequence of suspensions SXi `skewered' along the ray R , and then if we collapse R to a point we obtain i Xi where Xi is the reduced suspension of Xi , obtained from SXi by collapsing the line segment X0 × [i, i+1] to a point, so Xi has (n+1) skeleton

a point. Thus Hk(T /Z) = 0 for k  n + 1 . The long exact sequence of the pair (T , Z)

then implies that Hk(T ) = 0 for k  n , and we have proved () .



Let X be a CW complex. Using Lemma 2.34, portions of the long exact sequences for the pairs (Xn+1, Xn) , (Xn, Xn-1) , and (Xn-1, Xn-2) fit into a diagram

where dn+1 and dn are defined as the compositions jnn+1 and jn-1n , which are just `relativizations' of the boundary maps n+1 and n . The composition dndn+1 includes two successive maps in one of the exact sequences, hence is zero. Thus the
horizontal row in the diagram is a chain complex, called the cellular chain complex of X since Hn(Xn, Xn-1) is free with basis in one-to-one correspondence with the n cells of X , so one can think of elements of Hn(Xn, Xn-1) as linear combinations of n cells of X . The homology groups of this cellular chain complex are called the cellular homology groups of X . Temporarily we denote them HnCW (X) .
Theorem 2.35. HnCW (X)  Hn(X) .

140 Chapter 2

Homology

Proof: From the diagram above, Hn(X) can be identified with Hn(Xn)/ Im n+1 .

Since jn is injective, it maps Im n+1 isomorphically onto Im(jnn+1) = Im dn+1 and Hn(Xn) isomorphically onto Im jn = Ker n . Since jn-1 is injective, Ker n = Ker dn . Thus jn induces an isomorphism of the quotient Hn(Xn)/ Im n+1 onto

Ker dn/ Im dn+1 .



Here are a few immediate applications:

(i) Hn(X) = 0 if X is a CW complex with no n cells. (ii) More generally, if X is a CW complex with k n cells, then Hn(X) is generated
by at most k elements. For since Hn(Xn, Xn-1) is free abelian on k generators, the subgroup Ker dn must be generated by at most k elements, hence also the quotient Ker dn/ Im dn+1 . (iii) If X is a CW complex having no two of its cells in adjacent dimensions, then
Hn(X) is free abelian with basis in one-to-one correspondence with the n cells of X . This is because the cellular boundary maps dn are automatically zero in this case.

This last observation applies for example to CPn , which has a CW structure with one cell of each even dimension 2k  2n as we saw in Example 0.6. Thus

Hi(CPn) 

Z 0

for i = 0, 2, 4, ··· , 2n otherwise

Another simple example is Sn × Sn with n > 1 , using the product CW structure con-

sisting of a 0 cell, two n cells, and a 2n cell.

It is possible to prove the statements (i)­(iii) for finite-dimensional CW complexes

by induction on the dimension, without using cellular homology but only the basic

results from the previous section. However, the viewpoint of cellular homology makes

(i)­(iii) quite transparent.

Next we describe how the cellular boundary maps dn can be computed. When
 n = 1 this is easy since the boundary map d1 : H1(X1, X0) H0(X0) is the same as the simplicial boundary map 1(X)0(X) . In case X is connected and has only
one 0 cell, then d1 must be 0 , otherwise H0(X) would not be Z . When n > 1 we will show that dn can be computed in terms of degrees:
Cellular Boundary Formula. dn(en) =  den-1 where d is the degree of the
  map Sn-1 Xn-1 Sn-1 that is the composition of the attaching map of en with
the quotient map collapsing Xn-1 - en-1 to a point.
Here we are identifying the cells en and en-1 with generators of the corresponding
summands of the cellular chain groups. The summation in the formula contains only finitely many terms since the attaching map of en has compact image, so this image meets only finitely many cells en-1 .
To derive the cellular boundary formula, consider the commutative diagram

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 141

where:  is the characteristic map of the cell en and  is its attaching map.
 q : Xn-1 Xn-1/Xn-2 is the quotient map.  q : Xn-1/Xn-2 Sn-1 collapses the complement of the cell en-1 to a point, the
resulting quotient sphere being identified with Sn-1 = Dn-1/Dn-1 via the characteristic map  .
  : Dn Sn-1 is the composition qq , in other words, the attaching map  of en followed by the quotient map Xn-1 Sn-1 collapsing the complement of
en-1 in Xn-1 to a point.
The map  takes a chosen generator [Dn]  Hn(Dn, Dn) to a generator of the Z summand of Hn(Xn, Xn-1) corresponding to en . Letting en denote this generator, commutativity of the left half of the diagram then gives dn(en) = jn-1[Dn] . In terms of the basis for Hn-1(Xn-1, Xn-2) corresponding to the cells en-1 , the map q is the projection of Hn-1(Xn-1/Xn-2) onto its Z summand corresponding to en-1 . Commutativity of the diagram then yields the formula for dn given above.
Example 2.36. Let Mg be the closed orientable surface of genus g with its usual CW
structure consisting of one 0 cell, 2g 1 cells, and one 2 cell attached by the product
of commutators [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg] . The associated cellular chain complex is
0  Z  d2 Z2g  d1 Z  0
As observed above, d1 must be 0 since there is only one 0 cell. Also, d2 is 0 because each ai or bi appears with its inverse in [a1, b1] ··· [ag, bg] , so the maps  are homotopic to constant maps. Since d1 and d2 are both zero, the homology groups of Mg are the same as the cellular chain groups, namely, Z in dimensions 0 and 2 , and Z2g in dimension 1 .
Example 2.37. The closed nonorientable surface Ng of genus g has a cell structure
with one 0 cell, g 1 cells, and one 2 cell attached by the word a12a22 ··· a2g . Again
d1 = 0 , and d2 : ZZg is specified by the equation d2(1) = (2, ··· , 2) since each ai
appears in the attaching word of the 2 cell with total exponent 2 , which means that
each  is homotopic to the map z  z2 , of degree 2 . Since d2(1) = (2, ··· , 2) , we
have d2 injective and hence H2(Ng) = 0 . If we change the basis for Zg by replacing the last standard basis element (0, ··· , 0, 1) by (1, ··· , 1) , we see that H1(Ng) 
Zg-1  Z2 .

142 Chapter 2

Homology

These two examples illustrate the general fact that the orientability of a closed connected manifold M of dimension n is detected by Hn(M) , which is Z if M is orientable and 0 otherwise. This is shown in Theorem 3.26.

Example 2.38: An Acyclic Space. Let X be obtained from S1  S1 by attaching two

 2 cells by the words a5b-3 and b3(ab)-2 . Then d2 : Z2

Z2 has matrix

5 -2 -3 1

,

with the two columns coming from abelianizing a5b-3 and b3(ab)-2 to 5a - 3b

and -2a + b , in additive notation. The matrix has determinant -1 , so d2 is an isomorphism and Hi(X) = 0 for all i . Such a space X is called acyclic.
We can see that this acyclic space is not contractible by considering 1(X) , which has the presentation a, b || a5b-3, b3(ab)-2 . There is a nontrivial homomorphism

from this group to the group G of rotational symmetries of a regular dodecahedron,

sending a to the rotation a through angle 2 /5 about the axis through the center of a pentagonal face, and b to the rotation b through angle 2 /3 about the axis through a vertex of this face. The composition ab is a rotation through angle  about the axis through the midpoint of an edge abutting this vertex. Thus the relations

a5 = b3 = (ab)2 defining 1(X) become a5 = b3 = (ab)2 = 1 in G , which means
there is a well-defined homomorphism  : 1(X)G sending a to a and b to b .
It is not hard to see that G is generated by a and b , so  is surjective. With
more work one can compute that the kernel of  is Z2 , generated by the element a5 = b3 = (ab)2 , and this Z2 is in fact the center of 1(X) . In particular, 1(X) has
order 120 since G has order 60.

After these 2 dimensional examples, let us now move up to three dimensions, where we have the additional task of computing the cellular boundary map d3 .
Example 2.39. A 3 dimensional torus
T 3 = S1 × S1 × S1 can be constructed from a cube by identifying each pair of opposite square faces as in the first of the two figures. The second figure shows a slightly different pattern of identifications of opposite faces, with the front and back faces now identified via a rotation of the cube around a horizontal left-right axis. The space produced by these identifications is the product K × S1 of a Klein bottle and a circle. For both T 3 and K × S1 we have a CW structure with one 3 cell, three 2 cells, three 1 cells, and one 0 cell. The cellular chain complexes thus have the form
0  Z  d3 Z3  d2 Z3 0 Z  0

In the case of the 3 torus T 3 the cellular boundary map d2 is zero by the same
calculation as for the 2 dimensional torus. We claim that d3 is zero as well. This
amounts to saying that the three maps   : S2 S2 corresponding to the three 2 cells

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 143

have degree zero. Each  maps the interiors of two opposite faces of the cube homeomorphically onto the complement of a point in the target S2 and sends the
remaining four faces to this point. Computing local degrees at the center points of the two opposite faces, we see that the local degree is +1 at one of these points and -1 at the other, since the restrictions of  to these two faces differ by a reflection of the boundary of the cube across the plane midway between them, and a reflection has degree -1 . Since the cellular boundary maps are all zero, we deduce that Hi(T 3) is Z for i = 0, 3 , Z3 for i = 1, 2 , and 0 for i > 3 .
For K × S1 , when we compute local degrees for the front and back faces we find that the degrees now have the same rather than opposite signs since the map  on these two faces differs not by a reflection but by a rotation of the boundary of the cube. The local degrees for the other faces are the same as before. Using the letters A , B , C to denote the 2 cells given by the faces orthogonal to the edges a , b , c , respectively, we have the boundary formulas d3e3 = 2C , d2A = 2b , d2B = 0 , and d2C = 0 . It
follows that H3(K × S1) = 0 , H2(K × S1) = Z  Z2 , and H1(K × S1) = Z  Z  Z2 .
Many more examples of a similar nature, quotients of a cube or other polyhedron
with faces identified in some pattern, could be worked out in similar fashion. But let
us instead turn to some higher-dimensional examples.
Example 2.40: Moore Spaces. Given an abelian group G and an integer n  1 , we
will construct a CW complex X such that Hn(X)  G and Hi(X) = 0 for i  n . Such a space is called a Moore space, commonly written M(G, n) to indicate the dependence on G and n . It is probably best for the definition of a Moore space to include the condition that M(G, n) be simply-connected if n > 1 . The spaces we construct will
have this property. As an easy special case, when G = Zm we can take X to be Sn with a cell en+1
attached by a map SnSn of degree m . More generally, any finitely generated G can
be realized by taking wedge sums of examples of this type for finite cyclic summands of G , together with copies of Sn for infinite cyclic summands of G .
In the general nonfinitely generated case let F G be a homomorphism of a free
abelian group F onto G , sending a basis for F onto some set of generators of G . The kernel K of this homomorphism is a subgroup of a free abelian group, hence is itself free abelian. Choose bases {x} for F and {y} for K , and write y =  dx . Let Xn =  Sn , so Hn(Xn)  F via Corollary 2.25. We will construct X from Xn by
 attaching cells en+1 via maps f : Sn Xn such that the composition of f with the
projection onto the summand Sn has degree d . Then the cellular boundary map
dn+1 will be the inclusion K  F , hence X will have the desired homology groups.
The construction of f generalizes the construction in Example 2.31 of a map
 Sn Sn of given degree. Namely, we can let f map the complement of  |d|

144 Chapter 2

Homology

disjoint balls in Sn to the 0 cell of Xn while sending |d| of the balls onto the summand Sn by maps of degree +1 if d > 0 , or degree -1 if d < 0 .
Example 2.41. By taking a wedge sum of the Moore spaces constructed in the preced-
ing example for varying n we obtain a connected CW complex with any prescribed
sequence of homology groups in dimensions 1, 2, 3, ··· .
Example 2.42: Real Projective Space RPn . As we saw in Example 0.4, RPn has a CW
structure with one cell ek in each dimension k  n , and the attaching map for ek is the
 2 sheeted covering projection  : Sk-1 RPk-1 . To compute the boundary map dk   we compute the degree of the composition Sk-1  RPk-1 q RPk-1/RPk-2 = Sk-1 ,
with q the quotient map. The map q restricts to a homeomorphism from each component of Sk-1 - Sk-2 onto RPk-1 - RPk-2 , and these two homeomorphisms are obtained from each other by precomposing with the antipodal map of Sk-1 , which has degree (-1)k . Hence deg q = deg 11 + deg(-11) = 1 + (-1)k , and so dk is either 0 or multiplication by 2 according to whether k is odd or even. Thus the cellular chain complex for RPn is

0  Z 2 Z 0 ··· 2 Z 0 Z 2 Z 0 Z 0 0  Z 0 Z 2 ··· 2 Z 0 Z 2 Z 0 Z 0

if n is even if n is odd

From this it follows that  Z
Hk(RPn) =  Z2 0

for k = 0 and for k = n odd for k odd, 0 < k < n otherwise

Example 2.43: Lens Spaces. This example is somewhat more complicated. Given an

integer m > 1 and integers 1, ··· , n relatively prime to m , define the lens space L = Lm(1, ··· , n) to be the orbit space S2n-1/Zm of the unit sphere S2n-1  Cn with the action of Zm generated by the rotation (z1, ··· , zn) = (e2i1/mz1, ··· , e2in/mzn) , rotating the j th C factor of Cn by the angle 2 j/m . In particular, when m = 2 ,  is the antipodal map, so L = RP2n-1 in this case. In the general case, the projection
 S2n-1 L is a covering space since the action of Zm on S2n-1 is free: Only the identity
element fixes any point of S2n-1 since each point of S2n-1 has some coordinate zj nonzero and then e2ikj/mzj  zj for 0 < k < m , as a result of the assumption that
j is relatively prime to m . We shall construct a CW structure on L with one cell ek for each k  2n - 1 and

show that the resulting cellular chain complex is

0 Z 0 Z m Z 0 ··· 0 Z m Z 0 Z  0

with boundary maps alternately 0 and multiplication by m . Hence

 Z

for k = 0, 2n - 1

Hk Lm(1, ··· , n) =  Zm for k odd, 0 < k < 2n - 1 0 otherwise

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 145

To obtain the CW structure, first subdivide the unit circle C in the nth C factor of Cn by taking the points e2ij/m  C as vertices, j = 1, ··· , m . Joining the j th vertex of C to the unit sphere S2n-3  Cn-1 by arcs of great circles in S2n-1 yields a (2n - 2) dimensional ball Bj2n-2 bounded by S2n-3 . Specifically, Bj2n-2 consists of the points cos  (0, ··· , 0, e2ij/m)+sin  (z1, ··· , zn-1, 0) for 0     /2 . Similarly, joining the j th edge of C to S2n-3 gives a ball Bj2n-1 bounded by Bj2n-2 and Bj2+n1-2 , subscripts being taken mod m . The rotation  carries S2n-3 to itself and rotates C by the angle 2 n/m , hence  permutes the Bj2n-2 's and the Bj2n-1 's. A suitable power of  , namely r where r n  1 mod m , takes each Bj2n-2 and Bj2n-1 to the next one. Since r has order m , it is also a generator of the rotation group Zm , and hence we may obtain L as the quotient of one Bj2n-1 by identifying its two faces Bj2n-2 and Bj2+n1-2 together via r .
In particular, when n = 2 , Bj2n-1 is a lens-shaped 3 ball and L is obtained from this ball by identifying its two curved disk faces via r , which may be described as
the composition of the reflection across the plane con-
taining the rim of the lens, taking one face of the lens to
the other, followed by a rotation of this face through the
angle 2 /m where  = r 1 . The figure illustrates the case (m, ) = (7, 2) , with the two dots indicating a typical pair of identified points in
the upper and lower faces of the lens. Since the lens space L is determined by the rota-
tion angle 2 /m , it is conveniently written L/m . Clearly only the mod m value of  matters. It is a classical theorem of Reidemeister from the 1930s that L/m is homeomorphic to L/m iff m = m and   ±±1 mod m . For example, when m = 7 there are only two distinct lens spaces L1/7 and L2/7 . The `if' part of this theorem is easy: Reflecting the lens through a mirror shows that L/m  L-/m , and by interchanging the roles of the two C factors of C2 one obtains L/m  L-1/m . In the converse direction, L/m  L/m clearly implies m = m since 1(L/m)  Zm . The rest of the
theorem takes considerably more work, involving either special 3 dimensional tech-
niques or more algebraic methods that generalize to classify the higher-dimensional
lens spaces as well. The latter approach is explained in [Cohen 1973].
Returning to the construction of a CW structure on Lm(1, ··· , n) , observe that the (2n - 3) dimensional lens space Lm(1, ··· , n-1) sits in Lm(1, ··· , n) as the quotient of S2n-3 , and Lm(1, ··· , n) is obtained from this subspace by attaching two cells, of dimensions 2n - 2 and 2n - 1 , coming from the interiors of Bj2n-1 and its two identified faces Bj2n-2 and Bj2+n1-2 . Inductively this gives a CW structure on Lm(1, ··· , n) with one cell ek in each dimension k  2n - 1 .
The boundary maps in the associated cellular chain complex are computed as
follows. The first one, d2n-1 , is zero since the identification of the two faces of Bj2n-1 is via a reflection (degree -1 ) across Bj2n-1 fixing S2n-3 , followed by a rota-

146 Chapter 2

Homology

tion (degree +1 ), so d2n-1(e2n-1) = e2n-2 - e2n-2 = 0 . The next boundary map d2n-2 takes e2n-2 to me2n-3 since the attaching map for e2n-2 is the quotient map
 S2n-3 Lm(1, ··· , n-1) and the balls Bj2n-3 in S2n-3 which project down onto e2n-3
are permuted cyclically by the rotation  of degree +1 . Inductively, the subsequent
boundary maps dk then alternate between 0 and multiplication by m .
Also of interest are the infinite-dimensional lens spaces Lm(1, 2, ···) = S/Zm defined in the same way as in the finite-dimensional case, starting from a sequence of
integers 1, 2, ··· relatively prime to m . The space Lm(1, 2, ···) is the union of the increasing sequence of finite-dimensional lens spaces Lm(1, ··· , n) for n = 1, 2, ··· , each of which is a subcomplex of the next in the cell structure we have just con-
structed, so Lm(1, 2, ···) is also a CW complex. Its cellular chain complex consists of a Z in each dimension with boundary maps alternately 0 and m , so its reduced
homology consists of a Zm in each odd dimension. In the terminology of §1.B, the infinite-dimensional lens space Lm(1, 2, ···) is
an Eilenberg­MacLane space K(Zm, 1) since its universal cover S is contractible, as we showed there. By Theorem 1B.8 the homotopy type of Lm(1, 2, ···) depends only on m , and not on the i 's. This is not true in the finite-dimensional case, when two lens spaces Lm(1, ··· , n) and Lm(1 , ··· , n ) have the same homotopy type iff 1 ··· n  ±kn1 ··· n mod m for some integer k . A proof of this is outlined in Exercise 2 in §3.E and Exercise 29 in §4.2. For example, the 3 dimensional lens spaces
L1/5 and L2/5 are not homotopy equivalent, though they have the same fundamental group and the same homology groups. On the other hand, L1/7 and L2/7 are homotopy equivalent but not homeomorphic.

Euler Characteristic
For a finite CW complex X , the Euler characteristic  (X) is defined to be the alternating sum n(-1)ncn where cn is the number of n cells of X , generalizing the familiar formula vertices - edges + faces for 2 dimensional complexes. The following result shows that  (X) can be defined purely in terms of homology, and hence depends only on the homotopy type of X . In particular,  (X) is independent of the choice of CW structure on X .

Theorem 2.44.  (X) = n(-1)n rank Hn(X) .

Here the rank of a finitely generated abelian group is the number of Z summands
when the group is expressed as a direct sum of cyclic groups. We shall need the
following fact, whose proof we leave as an exercise: If 0ABC0 is a short
exact sequence of finitely generated abelian groups, then rank B = rank A + rank C .

Proof of 2.44: This is purely algebraic. Let

0  Ck

   dk Ck-1

···

C1

 d1 C0  0

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 147

be a chain complex of finitely generated abelian groups, with cycles Zn = Ker dn ,
boundaries Bn = Im dn+1 , and homology Hn = Zn/Bn . Thus we have short exact
sequences 0ZnCnBn-10 and 0BnZnHn0 , hence

rank Cn = rank Zn + rank Bn-1 rank Zn = rank Bn + rank Hn

Now substitute the second equation into the first, multiply the resulting equation by

(-1)n , and sum over n to get n(-1)n rank Cn = n(-1)n rank Hn . Applying this

with Cn = Hn(Xn, Xn-1) then gives the theorem.



For example, the surfaces Mg and Ng have Euler characteristics  (Mg) = 2 - 2g and  (Ng) = 2 - g . Thus all the orientable surfaces Mg are distinguished from each other by their Euler characteristics, as are the nonorientable surfaces Ng , and there are only the relations  (Mg) =  (N2g) .
Split Exact Sequences
Suppose one has a retraction r : XA , so r i = 11 where i : AX is the inclusion. The induced map  i : Hn(A) Hn(X) is then injective since ri = 11 . From this it
follows that the boundary maps in the long exact sequence for (X, A) are zero, so the long exact sequence breaks up into short exact sequences
0  Hn(A) i Hn(X) j Hn(X, A)  0
The relation ri = 11 actually gives more information than this, by the following piece of elementary algebra:

Splitting Lemma. For a short exact sequence 0  A i B j C  0 of abelian
groups the following statements are equivalent :
(a) There is a homomorphism p : BA such that pi = 11 : AA . (b) There is a homomorphism s : CB such that js = 11 : CC .
(c) There is an isomorphism B  A  C making
a commutative diagram as at the right, where
the maps in the lower row are the obvious ones,
a  (a, 0) and (a, c)  c .

If these conditions are satisfied, the exact sequence is said to split. Note that (c) is symmetric: There is no essential difference between the roles of A and C .

Sketch of Proof: For the implication (a)  (c) one checks that the map BA  C ,

b  p(b), j(b) , is an isomorphism with the desired properties. For (b)  (c) one uses instead the map A  CB , (a, c)  i(a) + s(c) . The opposite implications

(c)  (a) and (c)  (b) are fairly obvious. If one wants to show (b)  (a) directly,

one can define p(b) = i-1 b - sj(b) . Further details are left to the reader.



148 Chapter 2

Homology

Except for the implications (b)  (a) and (b)  (c) , the proof works equally well
for nonabelian groups. In the nonabelian case, (b) is definitely weaker than (a) and (c),
and short exact sequences satisfying (b) only determine B as a semidirect product of
A and C . The difficulty is that s(C) might not be a normal subgroup of B . In the
nonabelian case one defines `splitting' to mean that (b) is satisfied.
In both the abelian and nonabelian contexts, if C is free then every exact sequence
0A i B j C0 splits, since one can define s : CB by choosing a basis {c}
for C and letting s(c) be any element b  B such that j(b) = c . The converse is also true: If every short exact sequence ending in C splits, then C is free. This is
because for every C there is a short exact sequence 0ABC0 with B free
-- choose generators for C and let B have a basis in one-to-one correspondence with
these generators, then let BC send each basis element to the corresponding generator -- so if this sequence 0ABC0 splits, C is isomorphic to a subgroup
of a free group, hence is free.
From the Splitting Lemma and the remarks preceding it we deduce that a retrac-
tion r : XA gives a splitting Hn(X)  Hn(A)  Hn(X, A) . This can be used to show
the nonexistence of such a retraction in some cases, for example in the situation of
the Brouwer fixed point theorem, where a retraction  Dn Sn-1 would give an im-
possible splitting Hn-1(Dn)  Hn-1(Sn-1)  Hn-1(Dn, Sn-1) . For a somewhat more
subtle example, consider the mapping cylinder Mf of a degree m map f : SnSn
with m > 1 . If Mf retracted onto the Sn  Mf corresponding to the domain of f , we would have a split short exact sequence

But this sequence does not split since Z is not isomorphic to Z  Zm if m > 1 , so the
retraction cannot exist. In the simplest case of the degree 2 map S1S1 , z  z2 ,
this says that the Mo¨bius band does not retract onto its boundary circle.
Homology of Groups
In §1.B we constructed for each group G a CW complex K(G, 1) having a contractible universal cover, and we showed that the homotopy type of such a space K(G, 1) is uniquely determined by G . The homology groups Hn K(G, 1) therefore depend only on G , and are usually denoted simply Hn(G) . The calculations for lens spaces in Example 2.43 show that Hn(Zm) is Zm for odd n and 0 for even n > 0 . Since S1 is a K(Z, 1) and the torus is a K(Z× Z, 1) , we also know the homology of these two groups. More generally, the homology of finitely generated abelian groups can be computed from these examples using the Ku¨nneth formula in §3.B and the fact that a product K(G, 1)× K(H, 1) is a K(G× H, 1) .
Here is an application of the calculation of Hn(Zm) :

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 149

Proposition 2.45. If a finite-dimensional CW complex X is a K(G, 1) , then the group
G = 1(X) must be torsionfree.

This applies to quite a few manifolds, for example closed surfaces other than S2 and RP2 , and also many 3 dimensional manifolds such as complements of knots in S3 .

Proof: If G had torsion, it would have a finite cyclic subgroup Zm for some m > 1 ,

and the covering space of X corresponding to this subgroup of G = 1(X) would

be a K(Zm, 1) . Since X is a finite-dimensional CW complex, the same would be true

of its covering space K(Zm, 1) , and hence the homology of the K(Zm, 1) would be

nonzero in only finitely many dimensions. But this contradicts the fact that Hn(Zm)

is nonzero for infinitely many values of n .



Reflecting the richness of group theory, the homology of groups has been studied quite extensively. A good starting place for those wishing to learn more is the textbook [Brown 1982]. At a more advanced level the books [Adem & Milgram 1994] and [Benson 1992] treat the subject from a mostly topological viewpoint.
Mayer­Vietoris Sequences
In addition to the long exact sequence of homology groups for a pair (X, A) , there is another sort of long exact sequence, known as a Mayer­Vietoris sequence, which is equally powerful but is sometimes more convenient to use. For a pair of subspaces A , B  X such that X is the union of the interiors of A and B , this exact sequence has the form
···  Hn(A  B)  Hn(A)  Hn(B)  Hn(X)  Hn-1(A  B)  ··· ···  H0(X)  0
In addition to its usefulness for calculations, the Mayer­Vietoris sequence is also applied frequently in induction arguments, where one might know that a certain statement is true for A , B , and A  B by induction and then deduce that it is true for A  B by the exact sequence.
The Mayer­Vietoris sequence is easy to derive from the machinery of §2.1. Let Cn(A + B) be the subgroup of Cn(X) consisting of chains that are sums of chains in
A and chains in B . The usual boundary map   : Cn(X) Cn-1(X) takes Cn(A + B) to
Cn-1(A + B) , so the Cn(A + B) 's form a chain complex. According to Proposition 2.21,
the inclusions Cn(A + B)  Cn(X) induce isomorphisms on homology groups. The
Mayer­Vietoris sequence is then the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to the short exact sequence of chain complexes formed by the short exact sequences
0  Cn(A  B)   Cn(A)  Cn(B)  Cn(A + B)  0

150 Chapter 2

Homology

where (x) = (x, -x) and (x, y) = x + y . The exactness of this short exact sequence can be checked as follows. First, Ker  = 0 since a chain in A  B that is zero as a chain in A (or in B ) must be the zero chain. Next, Im   Ker  since
 = 0 . Also, Ker   Im  since for a pair (x, y)  Cn(A)  Cn(B) the condition
x + y = 0 implies x = -y , so x is a chain in both A and B , that is, x  Cn(A  B) , and (x, y) = (x, -x)  Im  . Finally, exactness at Cn(A + B) is immediate from the definition of Cn(A + B) .
The boundary map   : Hn(X) Hn-1(A  B) can easily be made explicit. A class
  Hn(X) is represented by a cycle z , and by barycentric subdivision or some other method we can choose z to be a sum x +y of chains in A and B , respectively. It need not be true that x and y are cycles individually, but x = -y since (x + y) = 0 , and the element   Hn-1(A  B) is represented by the cycle x = -y , as is clear from the definition of the boundary map in the long exact sequence of homology
groups associated to a short exact sequence of chain complexes.
There is also a formally identical Mayer­Vietoris sequence for reduced homology
groups, obtained by augmenting the previous short exact sequence of chain complexes
in the obvious way:

Mayer­Vietoris sequences can be viewed as analogs of the van Kampen theorem
since if AB is path-connected, the H1 terms of the reduced Mayer­Vietoris sequence
yield an isomorphism H1(X)  H1(A)  H1(B) / Im  . This is exactly the abelianized
statement of the van Kampen theorem, and H1 is the abelianization of 1 for pathconnected spaces, as we show in §2.A.
There are also Mayer­Vietoris sequences for decompositions X = A  B such that
A and B are deformation retracts of neighborhoods U and V with U V deformation retracting onto A  B . Under these assumptions the five-lemma implies that the maps
Cn(A + B)Cn(U + V ) induce isomorphisms on homology, and hence so do the maps Cn(A + B)Cn(X) , which was all that we needed to obtain a Mayer­Vietoris
sequence. For example, if X is a CW complex and A and B are subcomplexes, then we can choose for U and V neighborhoods of the form N(A) and N(B) constructed in the Appendix, which have the property that N(A)  N(B) = N(A  B) .
Example 2.46. Take X = Sn with A and B the northern and southern hemispheres,
so that A  B = Sn-1 . Then in the reduced Mayer­Vietoris sequence the terms
Hi(A)  Hi(B) are zero, so we obtain isomorphisms Hi(Sn)  Hi-1(Sn-1) . This gives
another way of calculating the homology groups of Sn by induction.
Example 2.47. We can decompose the Klein bottle K as the union of two M¨obius
bands A and B glued together by a homeomorphism between their boundary circles.

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 151

Then A , B , and A  B are homotopy equivalent to circles, so the interesting part of the reduced Mayer­Vietoris sequence for the decomposition K = A  B is the segment

0  H2(K)  H1(A  B)  H1(A)H1(B)  H1(K)  0
The map  is ZZ  Z , 1(2, -2) , since the boundary circle of a Mo¨bius band wraps
twice around the core circle. Since  is injective we obtain H2(K) = 0 . Furthermore,
we have H1(K)  Z  Z2 since we can choose (1, 0) and (1, -1) as a basis for Z  Z . All
the higher homology groups of K are zero from the earlier part of the Mayer­Vietoris sequence.

Example 2.48. Let us describe an exact sequence which is somewhat similar to the
Mayer­Vietoris sequence and which in some cases generalizes it. If we are given two
maps f , g : XY then we can form a quotient space Z of the disjoint union of X × I
and Y via the identifications (x, 0)  f (x) and (x, 1)  g(x) , thus attaching one
end of X × I to Y by f and the other end by g . For example, if f and g are each the
identity map XX then Z = X × S1 . If only one of f and g , say f , is the identity
map, then Z is homeomorphic to what is called the mapping torus of g , the quotient
space of X × I under the identifications (x, 0)  (g(x), 1) . The Klein bottle is an
example, with g a reflection S1S1 .
The exact sequence we want has the form

      () ···

Hn(X) f-g Hn(Y ) i Hn(Z)

Hn-1(X) f-g Hn-1(Y )

···

where i is the evident inclusion Y  Z . To derive this exact sequence, consider the map q : (X × I, X × I)(Z, Y ) that is the restriction to X × I of the quotient map X × I  Y Z . The map q induces a map of long exact sequences:

In the upper row the middle term is the direct sum of two copies of Hn(X) , and the map i is surjective since X × I deformation retracts onto X × {0} and X × {1} . Surjectivity of the maps i in the upper row implies that the next maps are 0 , which in turn implies that the maps  are injective. Thus the map  in the upper row
gives an isomorphism of Hn+1(X × I, X × I) onto the kernel of i , which consists of the pairs (, -) for   Hn(X) . This kernel is a copy of Hn(X) , and the middle vertical map q takes (, -) to f() - g() . The left-hand q is an isomorphism since these are good pairs and q induces a homeomorphism of quotient spaces
(X × I)/(X × I)Z/Y . Hence if we replace Hn+1(Z, Y ) in the lower exact sequence
by the isomorphic group Hn(X)  Ker i we obtain the long exact sequence we want.
In the case of the mapping torus of a reflection g : S1S1 , with Z a Klein bottle,
the interesting portion of the exact sequence () is

152 Chapter 2

Homology

Thus H2(Z) = 0 and we have a short exact sequence 0Z2H1(Z)Z0 . This
splits since Z is free, so H1(Z)  Z2  Z . Other examples are given in the Exercises.
If Y is the disjoint union of spaces Y1 and Y2 , with f : XY1 and g : XY2 ,
then Z consists of the mapping cylinders of these two maps with their domain ends identified. For example, suppose we have a CW complex decomposed as the union of
two subcomplexes A and B and we take f and g to be the inclusions A  B  A and A  B  B . Then the double mapping cylinder Z is homotopy equivalent to A  B
since we can view Z as (A  B)× I with A and B attached at the two ends, and then slide the attaching of A down to the B end to produce A  B with (A  B)× I attached at one of its ends. By Proposition 0.18 the sliding operation preserves homotopy type, so we obtain a homotopy equivalence Z  A  B . The exact sequence () in this case is the Mayer­Vietoris sequence.
A relative form of the Mayer­Vietoris sequence is sometimes useful. If one has a pair of spaces (X, Y ) = (A  B, C  D) with C  A and D  B , such that X is the union of the interiors of A and B , and Y is the union of the interiors of C and D , then there is a relative Mayer­Vietoris sequence
···  Hn(A  B, C  D)  Hn(A, C)  Hn(B, D)  Hn(X, Y )  ···
To derive this, consider the commutative diagram

where Cn(A + B, C + D) is the quotient of the subgroup Cn(A + B)  Cn(X) by its subgroup Cn(C + D)  Cn(Y ) . Thus the three columns of the diagram are exact. We have seen that the first two rows are exact, and we claim that the third row is exact also, with the maps  and  induced from the  and  in the second row. Since  = 0 in the second row, this holds also in the third row, so the third row is at least a chain complex. Viewing the three rows as chain complexes, the diagram then represents a short exact sequence of chain complexes. The associated long exact sequence of homology groups has two out of every three terms zero since the first two rows of the diagram are exact. Hence the remaining homology groups are zero and the third row is exact.

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 153

The third column maps to 0Cn(Y )Cn(X)Cn(X, Y )0 , inducing maps of
homology groups that are isomorphisms for the X and Y terms as we have seen above.
So by the five-lemma the maps Cn(A+B, C +D)Cn(X, Y ) also induce isomorphisms
on homology. The relative Mayer­Vietoris sequence is then the long exact sequence
of homology groups associated to the short exact sequence of chain complexes given
by the third row of the diagram.
Homology with Coefficients
There is an easy generalization of the homology theory we have considered so
far that behaves in a very similar fashion and sometimes offers technical advantages. The generalization consists of using chains of the form i nii where each i is a singular n simplex in X as before, but now the coefficients ni are taken to lie in a fixed abelian group G rather than Z . Such n chains form an abelian group Cn(X; G) , and there is the expected relative version Cn(X, A; G) = Cn(X; G)/Cn(A; G) . The old formula for the boundary maps  can still be used for arbitrary G , namely  i nii = i,j (-1)jnii || [v0, ··· , vj, ··· , vn] . Just as before, a calculation shows that 2 = 0 , so the groups Cn(X; G) and Cn(X, A; G) form chain complexes. The resulting homology groups Hn(X; G) and Hn(X, A; G) are called homology groups with coefficients in G. Reduced groups Hn(X; G) are defined via the augmented chain
complex ···  C0(X; G)  G  0 with  again defined by summing coefficients.
The case G = Z2 is particularly simple since one is just considering sums of singular simplices with coefficients 0 or 1 , so by discarding terms with coefficient 0
one can think of chains as just finite `unions' of singular simplices. The boundary
formulas also simplify since one no longer has to worry about signs. Since signs are
an algebraic representation of orientation considerations, one can also ignore orien-
tations. This means that homology with Z2 coefficients is often the most natural tool in the absence of orientability.
All the theory we developed in §2.1 for Z coefficients carries over directly to general coefficient groups G with no change in the proofs. The same is true for Mayer­ Vietoris sequences. Differences between Hn(X; G) and Hn(X) begin to appear only when one starts making calculations. When X is a point, the method used to compute Hn(X) shows that Hn(X; G) is G for n = 0 and 0 for n > 0 . From this it follows just as for G = Z that Hn(Sk; G) is G for n = k and 0 otherwise.
Cellular homology also generalizes to homology with coefficients, with the cellular chain group Hn(Xn, Xn-1) replaced by Hn(Xn, Xn-1; G) , which is a direct sum of G 's, one for each n cell. The proof that the cellular homology groups HnCW (X) agree with singular homology Hn(X) extends immediately to give HnCW (X; G)  Hn(X; G) . The cellular boundary maps are given by the same formula as for Z coefficients, dn  nen = , dnen-1 . The old proof applies, but the following result is needed to know that the coefficients d are the same as before:

154 Chapter 2

Homology

Lemma 2.49. If f : SkSk has degree m , then  f : Hk(Sk; G) Hk(Sk; G) is multi-
plication by m .

Proof: As a preliminary observation, note that a homomorphism  : G1G2 induces maps   : Cn(X, A; G1) Cn(X, A; G2) commuting with boundary maps, so there are induced homomorphisms   : Hn(X, A; G1) Hn(X, A; G2) . These have various nat-
urality properties. For example, they give a commutative diagram mapping the long

exact sequence of homology for the pair (X, A) with G1 coefficients to the correspond-
ing sequence with G2 coefficients. Also, the maps  commute with homomorphisms
f induced by maps f : (X, A)(Y , B) . Now let f : SkSk have degree m and let  : ZG take 1 to a given element

g  G . Then we have a commutative

diagram as at the right, where commu-

tativity of the outer two squares comes

from the inductive calculation of these

homology groups, reducing to the case k = 0 when the commutativity is obvious.

Since the diagram commutes, the assumption that the map across the top takes

1 to m implies that the map across the bottom takes g to mg .



Example 2.50. It is instructive to see what happens to the homology of RPn when
the coefficient group G is chosen to be a field F . The cellular chain complex is
··· 0 F 2 F 0 F 2 F 0 F  0
Hence if F has characteristic 2 , for example if F = Z2 , then Hk(RPn; F )  F for 0  k  n , a more uniform answer than with Z coefficients. On the other hand, if
F has characteristic different from 2 then the boundary maps F 2 F are isomor-
phisms, hence Hk(RPn; F ) is F for k = 0 and for k = n odd, and is zero otherwise.
In §3.A we will see that there is a general algebraic formula expressing homology with arbitrary coefficients in terms of homology with Z coefficients. Some easy special cases that give much of the flavor of the general result are included in the Exercises.
In spite of the fact that homology with Z coefficients determines homology with other coefficient groups, there are many situations where homology with a suitably chosen coefficient group can provide more information than homology with Z coefficients. A good example of this is the proof of the Borsuk­Ulam theorem using Z2 coefficients in §2.B.
As another illustration, we will now give an example of a map f : XY with the
property that the induced maps f are trivial for homology with Z coefficients but not for homology with Zm coefficients for suitably chosen m . Thus homology with Zm coefficients tells us that f is not homotopic to a constant map, which we would not know using only Z coefficients.

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 155

Example 2.51. Let X be a Moore space M(Zm, n) obtained from Sn by attaching a
 cell en+1 by a map of degree m . The quotient map f : X X/Sn = Sn+1 induces
trivial homomorphisms on reduced homology with Z coefficients since the nonzero reduced homology groups of X and Sn+1 occur in different dimensions. But with Zm
coefficients the story is different, as we can see by considering the long exact sequence of the pair (X, Sn) , which contains the segment

  0 = Hn+1(Sn; Zm)

Hn+1(X; Zm) f Hn+1(X/Sn; Zm)

Exactness says that f is injective, hence nonzero since Hn+1(X; Zm) is Zm , the cel-
  lular boundary map Hn+1(Xn+1, Xn; Zm) Hn(Xn, Xn-1; Zm) being Zm m Zm .

Exercises
1. Prove the Brouwer fixed point theorem for maps f : DnDn by applying degree theory to the map SnSn that sends both the northern and southern hemispheres
of Sn to the southern hemisphere via f . [This was Brouwer's original proof.]
 2. Given a map f : S2n S2n , show that there is some point x  S2n with either f (x) = x or f (x) = -x .  Deduce that every map RP2n RP2n has a fixed point.  Construct maps RP2n-1 RP2n-1 without fixed points from linear transformations  R2n R2n without eigenvectors.
3. Let f : SnSn be a map of degree zero. Show that there exist points x, y  Sn
with f (x) = x and f (y) = -y . Use this to show that if F is a continuous vector field defined on the unit ball Dn in Rn such that F (x)  0 for all x , then there exists a point on Dn where F points radially outward and another point on Dn where F
points radially inward.
4. Construct a surjective map SnSn of degree zero, for each n  1 .
5. Show that any two reflections of Sn across different n dimensional hyperplanes
are homotopic, in fact homotopic through reflections. [The linear algebra formula for
a reflection in terms of inner products may be helpful.]
6. Show that every map SnSn can be homotoped to have a fixed point if n > 0 .
7. For an invertible linear transformation f : RnRn show that the induced map
on Hn(Rn, Rn - {0})  Hn-1(Rn - {0})  Z is 11 or -11 according to whether the determinant of f is positive or negative. [Use Gaussian elimination to show that the matrix of f can be joined by a path of invertible matrices to a diagonal matrix with
±1 's on the diagonal.]
8. A polynomial f (z) with complex coefficients, viewed as a map CC , can always be extended to a continuous map of one-point compactifications f : S2S2 . Show
that the degree of f equals the degree of f as a polynomial. Show also that the local degree of f at a root of f is the multiplicity of the root.

156 Chapter 2

Homology

9. Compute the homology groups of the following 2 complexes: (a) The quotient of S2 obtained by identifying north and south poles to a point. (b) S1 × (S1  S1) . (c) The space obtained from D2 by first deleting the interiors of two disjoint subdisks
in the interior of D2 and then identifying all three resulting boundary circles
together via homeomorphisms preserving clockwise orientations of these circles. (d) The quotient space of S1 × S1 obtained by identifying points in the circle S1 × {x0}
that differ by 2 /m rotation and identifying points in the circle {x0}× S1 that differ by 2 /n rotation.

10. Let X be the quotient space of S2 under the identifications x  -x for x in the
equator S1 . Compute the homology groups Hi(X) . Do the same for S3 with antipodal points of the equatorial S2  S3 identified.

11. In an exercise for §1.2 we described a 3 dimensional CW complex obtained from the cube I3 by identifying opposite faces via a one-quarter twist. Compute the ho-
mology groups of this complex.

12. Show that the quotient map  S1 × S1 S2 collapsing the subspace S1  S1 to a
point is not nullhomotopic by showing that it induces an isomorphism on H2 . On the
other hand, show via covering spaces that any map  S2 S1 × S1 is nullhomotopic.

13. Let X be the 2 complex obtained from S1 with its usual cell structure by attaching

two 2 cells by maps of degrees 2 and 3 , respectively.
(a) Compute the homology groups of all the subcomplexes A  X and the corresponding quotient complexes X/A .
(b) Show that X  S2 and that the only subcomplex A  X for which the quotient
map XX/A is a homotopy equivalence is the trivial subcomplex, the 0 cell.

14. A map f : SnSn satisfying f (x) = f (-x) for all x is called an even map. Show that an even map SnSn must have even degree, and that the degree must in fact be

zero when n is even. When n is odd, show there exist even maps of any given even
degree. [Hints: If f is even, it factors as a composition SnRPnSn . Using the  calculation of Hn(RPn) in the text, show that the induced map Hn(Sn) Hn(RPn)
sends a generator to twice a generator when n is odd. It may be helpful to show that
 the quotient map RPn RPn/RPn-1 induces an isomorphism on Hn when n is odd.]

15. Show that if X is a CW complex then Hn(Xn) is free by identifying it with the
 kernel of the cellular boundary map Hn(Xn, Xn-1) Hn-1(Xn-1, Xn-2) .

16. Let n = [v0, ··· , vn] have its natural  complex structure with k simplices

[vi0 , ··· , vik ] for i0 < ··· < ik . Compute the ranks of the simplicial (or cellular) chain

groups i(n) and the subgroups of cycles and boundaries. [Hint: Pascal's triangle.]

Apply this to show that the k skeleton of n has homology groups Hi (n)k equal

to 0 for i < k , and free of rank

n k+1

for i = k .

Computations and Applications

Section 2.2 157

17. Show the isomorphism between cellular and singular homology is natural in
the following sense: A map f : XY that is cellular -- satisfying f (Xn)  Y n for
all n -- induces a chain map f between the cellular chain complexes of X and
 Y , and the map f : HnCW (X) HnCW (Y ) induced by this chain map corresponds to  f : Hn(X) Hn(Y ) under the isomorphism HnCW  Hn .
18. For a CW pair (X, A) show there is a relative cellular chain complex formed by the groups Hi(Xi, Xi-1  Ai) , having homology groups isomorphic to Hn(X, A) . 19. Compute Hi(RPn/RPm) for m < n by cellular homology, using the standard CW structure on RPn with RPm as its m skeleton.
20. For finite CW complexes X and Y , show that  (X × Y ) =  (X)  (Y ) .
21. If a finite CW complex X is the union of subcomplexes A and B , show that  (X) =  (A) +  (B) -  (A  B) .
22. For X a finite CW complex and p : XX an n sheeted covering space, show that
 (X) = n  (X) .
23. Show that if the closed orientable surface Mg of genus g is a covering space of Mh , then g = n(h - 1) + 1 for some n , namely, n is the number of sheets in the covering. [Conversely, if g = n(h - 1) + 1 then there is an n sheeted covering
MgMh , as we saw in Example 1.41.]
24. Suppose we build S2 from a finite collection of polygons by identifying edges
in pairs. Show that in the resulting CW structure on S2 the 1 skeleton cannot be either of the two graphs
shown, with five and six vertices. [This is one step in a proof that neither of these graphs embeds in R2 .]
25. Show that for each n  Z there is a unique function  assigning an integer to
each finite CW complex, such that (a) (X) = (Y ) if X and Y are homeomorphic, (b) (X) = (A) + (X/A) if A is a subcomplex of X , and (c) (S0) = n . For such
a function  , show that (X) = (Y ) if X  Y .
26. For a pair (X, A) , let X  CA be X with a cone on A attached.
(a) Show that X is a retract of X  CA iff A is contractible in X : There is a homotopy
ft : AX with f0 the inclusion A  X and f1 a constant map.
(b) Show that if A is contractible in X then Hn(X, A)  Hn(X)  Hn-1(A) , using the
fact that (X  CA)/X is the suspension SA of A .
27. The short exact sequences 0Cn(A)Cn(X)Cn(X, A)0 always split, but
why does this not always yield splittings Hn(X)  Hn(A)  Hn(X, A) ?
28. (a) Use the Mayer­Vietoris sequence to compute the homology groups of the space obtained from a torus S1 × S1 by attaching a Mo¨bius band via a homeomorphism from the boundary circle of the Mo¨bius band to the circle S1 × {x0} in the torus. (b) Do the same for the space obtained by attaching a M¨obius band to RP2 via a homeomorphism of its boundary circle to the standard RP1  RP2 .

158 Chapter 2

Homology

29. The surface Mg of genus g , embedded in R3 in the standard way, bounds a compact region R . Two copies of R , glued together by the identity map between their

boundary surfaces Mg , form a closed 3-manifold X . Compute the homology groups of X via the Mayer­Vietoris sequence for this decomposition of X into two copies of

R . Also compute the relative groups Hi(R, Mg) .

30. For the mapping torus Tf of a map f : XX , we constructed in Example 2.48 a

long exact sequence ···  Hn(X)

    11-f Hn(X)

Hn(Tf )

Hn-1 (X )

···.

Use

this to compute the homology of the mapping tori of the following maps:

(a) A reflection S2S2 .

(b) A map S2S2 of degree 2 .

(c) The map  S1 × S1 S1 × S1 that is the identity on one factor and a reflection on

the other.
(d) The map  S1 × S1 S1 × S1 that is a reflection on each factor. (e) The map  S1 × S1 S1 × S1 that interchanges the two factors and then reflects one

of the factors.

31. Use the Mayer­Vietoris sequence to show there are isomorphisms Hn(X  Y ) 
Hn(X)  Hn(Y ) if the basepoints of X and Y that are identified in X  Y are defor-
mation retracts of neighborhoods U  X and V  Y .

32. For SX the suspension of X , show by a Mayer­Vietoris sequence that there are
isomorphisms Hn(SX)  Hn-1(X) for all n .
33. Suppose the space X is the union of open sets A1, ··· , An such that each intersection Ai1  ···  Aik is either empty or has trivial reduced homology groups. Show that Hi(X) = 0 for i  n - 1 , and give an example showing this inequality is best possible, for each n .

34. [Deleted -- see the errata for comments.]

35. Use the Mayer­Vietoris sequence to show that a nonorientable closed surface,
or more generally a finite simplicial complex X for which H1(X) contains torsion, cannot be embedded as a subspace of R3 in such a way as to have a neighborhood
homeomorphic to the mapping cylinder of some map from a closed orientable surface
to X . [This assumption on a neighborhood is in fact not needed if one deduces the
result from Alexander duality in §3.3.]
36. Show that Hi(X × Sn)  Hi(X)  Hi-n(X) for all i and n , where Hi = 0 for i < 0 by definition. Namely, show Hi(X × Sn)  Hi(X)  Hi(X × Sn, X × {x0}) and
Hi(X × Sn, X × {x0})  Hi-1(X × Sn-1, X × {x0}) . [For the latter isomorphism the relative Mayer­Vietoris sequence yields an easy proof.]

37. Give an elementary derivation for the Mayer­Vietoris sequence in simplicial homology for a  complex X decomposed as the union of subcomplexes A and B .

Computations and Applications 38. Show that a commutative diagram

Section 2.2 159

with the two sequences across the top and bottom exact, gives rise to an exact se-
quence ···  En+1  Bn  Cn  Dn  En  Bn-1  ··· where the maps
are obtained from those in the previous diagram in the obvious way, except that
 Bn Cn  Dn has a minus sign in one coordinate.
39. Use the preceding exercise to derive relative Mayer­Vietoris sequences for CW
pairs (X, Y ) = (A  B, C  D) with A = B or C = D .
40. From the long exact sequence of homology groups associated to the short ex-
act sequence of chain complexes 0  Ci(X) n Ci(X)  Ci(X; Zn)  0 deduce
immediately that there are short exact sequences
0  Hi(X)/nHi(X)  Hi(X; Zn)  n-Torsion(Hi-1(X))  0
where n-Torsion(G) is the kernel of the map G n G , g  ng . Use this to show that
Hi(X; Zp) = 0 for all i and all primes p iff Hi(X) is a vector space over Q for all i .
41. For X a finite CW complex and F a field, show that the Euler characteristic  (X) can also be computed by the formula  (X) = n(-1)n dim Hn(X; F ) , the alternating sum of the dimensions of the vector spaces Hn(X; F ) .
42. Let X be a finite connected graph having no vertex that is the endpoint of just
one edge, and suppose that H1(X; Z) is free abelian of rank n > 1 , so the group of automorphisms of H1(X; Z) is GLn(Z) , the group of invertible n× n matrices with integer entries whose inverse matrix also has integer entries. Show that if G is a finite
group of homeomorphisms of X , then the homomorphism GGLn(Z) assigning to g : XX the induced homomorphism  g : H1(X; Z) H1(X; Z) is injective. Show the
same result holds if the coefficient group Z is replaced by Zm with m > 2 . What goes wrong when m = 2 ?
43. (a) Show that a chain complex of free abelian groups Cn splits as a direct sum of
subcomplexes 0Ln+1Kn0 with at most two nonzero terms. [Show the short exact sequence 0 Ker Cn Im 0 splits and take Kn = Ker  .]
(b) In case the groups Cn are finitely generated, show there is a further splitting into
summands 0Z0 and 0  Z m Z  0 . [Reduce the matrix of the boundary map  Ln+1 Kn to echelon form by elementary row and column operations.]
(c) Deduce that if X is a CW complex with finitely many cells in each dimension, then
Hn(X; G) is the direct sum of the following groups: a copy of G for each Z summand of Hn(X) a copy of G/mG for each Zm summand of Hn(X)
 a copy of the kernel of G m G for each Zm summand of Hn-1(X)

160 Chapter 2

Homology

Sometimes it is good to step back from the forest of details and look for general patterns. In this rather brief section we will first describe the general pattern of homology by axioms, then we will look at some common formal features shared by many of the constructions we have made, using the language of categories and functors which has become common in much of modern mathematics.
Axioms for Homology
For simplicity let us restrict attention to CW complexes and focus on reduced homology to avoid mentioning relative homology. A (reduced) homology theory assigns to each nonempty CW complex X a sequence of abelian groups hn(X) and to each map
f : XY between CW complexes a sequence of homomorphisms  f : hn(X) hn(Y )
such that (f g) = fg and 11 = 11 , and so that the following three axioms are satisfied.
(1) If f  g : XY , then f =  g : hn(X) hn(Y ) . (2) There are boundary homomorphisms   : hn(X/A) hn-1(A) defined for each CW
pair (X, A) , fitting into an exact sequence
     ···  hn(A) i hn(X) q hn(X/A)  hn-1(A) i ···
where i is the inclusion and q is the quotient map. Furthermore the boundary
maps are natural: For f : (X, A)(Y , B) inducing a quotient map f : X/AY /B ,
there are commutative diagrams

(3) For a wedge sum X =  X with inclusions i : X  X , the direct sum map   i :  hn(X) hn(X) is an isomorphism for each n .
Negative values for the subscripts n are permitted. Ordinary singular homology is zero in negative dimensions by definition, but interesting homology theories with nontrivial groups in negative dimensions do exist.
The third axiom may seem less substantial than the first two, and indeed for finite wedge sums it can be deduced from the first two axioms, though not in general for infinite wedge sums, as an example in the Exercises shows.
It is also possible, and not much more difficult, to give axioms for unreduced homology theories. One supposes one has relative groups hn(X, A) defined, specializing to absolute groups by setting hn(X) = hn(X, ) . Axiom (1) is replaced by its

